---
layout: post
title: Cancer
date: 2006-11-03T06:29:00.000Z
author: Marcus Hammarberg
tags:
  - Marcus private
modified_time: 2006-11-03T06:49:13.287Z
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-36533086.post-2612801392493732323
blogger_orig_url: http://www.marcusoft.net/2006/11/cancer.html
---

This
week I found out that I good friend of mine is dying in cancer.

He has battled one form of cancer during the spring and summer - and
actually won over it. So in late august I spoke to him and there were no
signs of the cancer. A real miracle if you ask me, because he wasn't
given any good chances.

But all of a sudden, a week ago, the cancer came back - this time in the
brain and in a place where nothing can be done.

Cancer really is a terrible decease - it seems to be able to hunt you
down even after you think that you have beaten it. In a way it becomes
more than a decease, it's almost as something with a mind of it's own. I
didn't think I could feel hatred for a decease but I do. I am angry with
it - but nothing can be done about it.

So he is right now "preparing" for what is inevitable coming, packing up
stuff, fixing economical transactions. How do you do that? How can you
go on living with this hanging over you?

Elin (my wife) is a nurse and tells me fantastic stories about people on
her clinic who fights terrible deceases with only one outcome with
incredible courage and good spirit. That's really something to which
for - that you have that strength.

Right now I am mustering power to be able to call my friend and speak to
him. I feel quite embarrassed to have to wait until I am ready but i
don't won't to be a burden to him but rather maybe say something to help
him. At least that is my hope
