---
layout: post
title: Humanism
date: 2007-06-15T06:16:00.000Z
author: Marcus Hammarberg
tags:
  - Marcus private
  - Salvation Army
modified_time: 2007-06-15T06:58:46.913Z
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-36533086.post-3625285521903556919
blogger_orig_url: http://www.marcusoft.net/2007/06/humanism.html
---

There is a movement growing in Sweden called "The humanist" or
something. They are not that many but since they are high profile people
the tend to take a lot of medial space. Also they have a very hard and
condemning tone in many of their
articles and appearances.

Their main thesis (according to a TV-interview with their leader Christer Sturmark
yesterday) is that they are against religion but all the bad things
religion leads to.

Well, well, well - that is something extra I must say. (Sarcasm coming
up:) Because all we religious people think that is the bad things that
people do in the name of all religions are the thing to focus on. In
fact - I think that, that is the whole idea with religion. Or isn't
it?

Seeing an embarrassing debate in TV
yesterday, surrounding this, I thought of
two things:

- What is the meaning with debates when all people do are talk in each
  others mouth all the time? I counted to four <span
    id="SPELLING_ERROR_7"
    class="blsp-spelling-corrected">simultaneous voices
  yesterday. Do they really think that we can hear what the say. No!
  We can't. No even when you talk louder and louder. The last time i
  had that problem in discussion with my friends I was six years
  old.
  But maybe that is the way you're supposed to act in TV. I don't
  know.
- You will never win a debate with the Humanist. They have made their
  mind up. Your own reason (don't know the word; <span
    id="SPELLING_ERROR_8" class="blsp-spelling-corrected">Swedish
  förnuft) and yourself know best.

So today I posted a small greeting to Christer Sturmark, just in case he didn't
know:

"Christer - I just wanted to say that
if you ever feel that your own reason not is <span
id="SPELLING_ERROR_13" class="blsp-spelling-corrected">enough or
if you own strength is running out, there is one that already loves you.
Even if you don't believe in him he believes in you.
God bless you"

There is a SciFi-movie called Signs in which a
good story exists. The movie is about aliens landing on the earth and
wanting to "harvest" people. So of course everybody is scared out of their
minds. One of the main characters is a priest and his brother ask him:

"What do you think, as a Christian, about this?"

"Well there are two kinds of people in the world; the ones that see all
that (the aliens) and are very scared, they think about it and what will
be done to them and they know; what ever happens their on there own to
solve this.

Then there are the other people who see all that and are very scared,
they think about it and what will be done to them and they know; what
ever happens, they are not alone.

Who would you rather be with?"
