---
layout: post
title: What to do now - Sprint Planner Helper Initialization
date: 2009-01-31T11:50:00.001Z
author: Marcus Hammarberg
tags:
  - Marcus private
  - .NET
  - ASP.NET MVC
  - Scrum
  - Agile
  - Sprint Planner Helper
  - TDD
modified_time: 2009-01-31T11:50:41.134Z
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-36533086.post-1759927773062858386
blogger_orig_url: http://www.marcusoft.net/2009/01/what-to-do-now-sprint-planner-helper.html
---



I'm free!!! So what do I do now. I have been talking to my colleagues
that now that don't have to do boring work with them ;) I need another
project in order to stay in touch with the IT-business.

Here is the reasons for me doing this at all:

- Have fun! - the second it's boring or takes to much time I'll end
    it. Promise
- To learn about
    [DDD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design),
    [TDD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development) and
    [ASP.NET MVC](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASP.NET_MVC). These three
    things has attracted a lot of my interest I would like to try them
    out out. Oh yeah - it will be in C#! No more VB.NET for me - thank
    you very much.
- Cannot take to much time (**max** 1 hour a day) - as stated earlier.
    I am not working!
- Document my progress here on the blog. This idea is a complete rip
    off from a lot of different
    [places](http://www.asp.net/learn/mvc-videos/#MVCStorefrontStarterKit),
    but I could be nice to see if it attracts any reader and/or
    comments.

OK - what to do, what to do... I am a SCRUM guy and I would like some
IT-support in certain phases of the project, most notable in the
planning. Become: the Sprint Planner Helper (tm) (the trademark is just
in my dreams... for now).

I whipped together a very basic initial product backlog. Any comments?
Otherwise I get to it... maybe tomorrow. This has taken the first hour.
Please comment if you think anything is missing or should be changed.
All feedback is welcome.

1\. As [Product
Owner](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/product-owner) I can create a
[product backlog](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/product-backlog)
so that the team knows what is to be done. Each product backlog item
requires at least an ID, description, initial priority. Optional are
story points (how big is this compared to other) and the possibility to
upload a document with additional business rules

2\. As [Product
Owner](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/product-owner) I can
prioritize the [product
backlog](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/product-backlog) by
changing the priority on the product backlog item so that the team knows
what is most important to me.

3\. As [Scrum Master](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrummaster) I
can create a team and invited team members.

4\. As [Scrum Master](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrummaster) I
can can create a sprint that represent the next sprint in order to plan
out what the team can accomplish during that period of time. The sprint
have a goal description and a start, stop and demo-date.

5\. As [Scrum Master](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrummaster) I
can calculate the ideal number of hours/man days by setting the
percentage that a person is available (for part-time resources), the
number of absent days and focus factor for each team member.

6\. As [Scrum Master](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrummaster) I
can create a [Sprint
Backlog](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/sprint-backlog) by
selecting items from the Product Backlog in order to plan the things to
do during the sprint. The sprint backlog item can also be created from
scratch. A sprint backlog item has an ID, Description,
How-To-Demo-description, a list of Actions and a summarized total number
of hours.

7\. As [Team Member](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrum-team) I
can add actions to a sprint backlog item in order to find out what to do
to be done with the Sprint Backlog Item. Each action has an ID,
Description and hours (max 8 h)

8\. As [Team Member](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrum-team) I
can update, change and delete Actions in order to easy plan the Sprint
Backlog Item.

9\. As [Scrum Master](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrummaster) I
can create an initial [burndown
chart](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/release-burndown) that shows
the total number of hours (y-axis) and the date for the sprint (x-axis)
in order to print it and use during the sprint.

10\. As [Scrum Master](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/scrummaster)
I can print nice card of all sprint backlog items and actions in order
to put them up on the [sprint task
board](http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/task-boards). This might
include printing the actual task board...
