---
layout: post
title: OreDev 2011 - day 2
date: '2011-11-10T17:24:00.000+01:00'
author: Marcus Hammarberg
tags:
  - .NET -
ÖreDev - Agile
modified_time: '2011-11-10T17:25:37.559+01:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-36533086.post-2535742331658073774
blogger_orig_url: http://www.marcusoft.net/2011/11/oredev-2011-day-2.html
---

As always -
after the first day my head was just spinning. I was so tired that I
slept before I hit the pillow. But today I'm feeling great again and am
ready for another great day of learning.

### Dan North on Embracing uncertainty

[Dan North](http://dannorth.net/) is one of my true heroes in our
industry. I've learned a lot of the stuff that I'm excited about from
stuff he written and spoke about. This is about embracing uncertainty -
which seems to sit nice with the whole BDD - [Deliberate
Discovery](http://dannorth.net/2010/08/30/introducing-deliberate-discovery/)
body of knowledge. Here's a few things I jotted down:


Patterns of effective delivery (behavior patterns that is)

How we turned the [agile manifesto](http://www.agilemanifesto.org/)
upside down nowadays

The half-time of requirements - how long time before half the
requirements needs to be rewritten

"We would rather be **wrong** than be uncertain!"

Christianity (!) and how faith become religion. Or values becoming rules
and structure. And the values disappear in the structure. Jesus was
anti-religion of the structures in his time. 

The answer don't matter - struggling with question is. 

Kent Beck didn't talk about the 12 practices of XP. He focused on values
and said: What I want to do is to get business and IT to talk each
others. The practices was just ONE way to reach his goal.

Get a handle on uncertainty to be able to manage it. One way to do that
is embracing uncertainty:

-   embracing uncertainty of scope - with rolling wave planning for
    example
-   embracing uncertainty of technology - start code by sketching out
    stuff for example
-   embracing uncertainty of effort - for example beyond budgeting
    (measure stuff and handling money as it was your own)
-   embracing uncertainty of structure - structure only gives you an
    illusion of control. you can't predict the future

Real options: a model of uncertainty - 

-   Options: making a deal that someone to buy the right to do something
    in the future. Buy the right to buy a bunch of SEK at a fixed price
    for example. 
-   Real options - betting against yourself in your everyday decisions. 
-   Create options for every decision 
-   "Never commit early unless you know why" 

Deliberate discovery - "Some unexpected bad things will happen" - go and
find them. Optimize for finding them. You can actively reduce that
ignorance.

<div>

Goes without saying - that was great!

</div>

### Greg Young on When not to use CQRS

<div>

Greg is going stone-age on us. No slides, no whiteboard and no sound! :)
Nice!
The hall is **packed** - this promise to be great.

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

CQRS and Event Sourcing is not suitable for monolithic applications. We
need bounded contexts - a huge point of CQRS (and ES) is decoupling. So
if you put everything in one big pile anyway - why bother?

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

CQRS applied in non-core (huge return on investment) applications. Is
this an area where our company is where
we derive our compatible advantage. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Don't use CQRS for the technical reasons - programmer pornography. It
could be considered but should be applied within a single bounded
context. It's not done for all bounded contexts.

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

A common problem is to do CQRS (and ES) and making a lot of decisions
upfront. Deciding to use BizTalk before you know what you're actually
building. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Using CQRS and becoming use case centric without buy-in from the
business. "Only the development team think is that they are core
business." Often combined with not being a domain expert. There is a
difference in being an expert in how the system currently works and
being domain experts. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Nice exercise; sit with the domain expert in just 2 h. Then build the
complete system (or at least the domain model). You will fail! But you
will raise some important questions. Now go back to the domain expert
again and ask those questions. Sit again in 2 h. Delete the code you did
the first day. Rinse, lather, repeat. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Don't write a CQRS framework. Hey, don't even USE a CQRS framework. Just
do it! You should be able to be up and running with something giving
business value in a day. Otherwise you might be focusing on the wrong
thing. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Use frameworks for stuff that would take a long time to write it
yourself. CQRS could be (and is) written in 200 lines - don't use a
framework. MVC would take considerably longer than that. :)

</div>

### Richard Öberg on Event sourcing explained

<div>

Richard will talk about what event sourcing is needed for and what it
will give you.

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

I was probably a bit tired but this didn't grasp me. Richard shows some
concise code written in his framework. Ironically Greg Young spent about
40 % of his talk on how you shouldn't write framework.

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

I liked Richards concept of exposing the events as ATOM feeds. He saves
them in JSON format and can then expose them as ATOM feeds for reporting
for example. Or send them further to other services. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Storing the events in the first place opens a lot of possibilities;
domain events that informs other parts of the system or other systems,
reporting, replication, backup and an audit log for free.  

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

By storing the events as the come in gives you a much more fine
grained control. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

I personally think is that to sell event sourcing to business is a bit
scary. But you could probably do ES anyway by simply have a reporting
database that is kept in sync with the event source. So that there still
is a relation database that most businesses are used to. 

</div>

### Lunch

<div>

I had great discussions with colleagues and friends on CQRS and
Specification by example. Again struck by the fact that best learning is
taking place in the breaks. Hard to sum up in blog posts though. :)

</div>

### Gojko Adzic on Sleeping with the enemy

<div>

Again Gojko is talking about something that really struck a chord with
me. So why is testers and developers; us and them? Why does developers
"know" more about "developing" and tester more about "testing" than
developers? 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Independent testing, code freeze, requirements sign-offs and document
change management - none of these were done by any of the amazingly
successful teams that Gojko interviewed for his book. There were the
team with no bugs in production for the last 5 years, doing releases
every other weeks, for examples. Or having so few bugs that they don't
even use a bug tracking tools - another example.

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Disbanded the developers team and the tester team and created a team
that is responsible for testing. And developing. Hey - they are
responsible for the quality of the product. And they level out the
knowledge gap (developing, testing) to better understand and help each
other. 

</div>

<div>

In the process they removed a bottleneck (undermanned in the testing
department).

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

We took a quick poll on who should own test automated functional test?
The audience argumented for both but Gojko disagreed, arguing that
programmers HATE doing automated tests and hence minimizing.  Testers
should/could spend time their time on designing tests (that testers are
good at) and programmers can then automate them (a typical developer
skill). 

</div>

<div>

Nice - but I disagree with the incentive for programmers to do it. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Gojko told a story where this kind of co-operation occurred by the
developers just sitting next to the tester. Not testing. What happened?
They started to suggest what could be automated, they learned about the
problems that the testers experienced and where problems
and misunderstandings occurred in the system.  

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Developers and testers need to start working together. Get together as a
whole team and ask yourself; what is our number 1 problem and how shall
we solve it?

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

A story on a very productive team that produced excellent quality. But
after a while they needed to test a lot of platforms and hired a tester
to help them with setting that up. They hired a brilliant tester. But
quality took a nose dive. Why? Because all of a sudden they had a
tester - who had become responsible for testing. Everybody else stopped
to care about test - something they did before!

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Testers should be responsible for ensuring that the right things,
testing the critical ("hard") stuff and teaching other how to test. 

</div>

<div>

Testers is a common bottleneck in companies today. Why? Because they
take on to big a responsibility - move the testing responsibility to
everybody. 

</div>

### Mark Rendle on Zen and the art of Software

<div>

I moved myself into the excellence-track (hey look at me:)) to see Mark
Rendle, the creator of
[Simple.Data](https://github.com/markrendle/Simple.Data/) and a general
interesting guy. And from the topic of the presentation this promise to
be interesting too :).

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Mark started with some book tips:

</div>

<div>

1.  Pragmatic programmer
2.  Design patterns
3.  Code complete
4.  Clean code
5.  Zen & the art of motorcycle maintenance

<div>

That last one is a bit surprising and the topic for this talk. It's a
book about quality. 

</div>

</div>

<div>

Mark is reading from the book and gives comments - novel way for a talk,
I must say. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

We're talking about what it takes to create quality software; stripping
away all the xDD and tools. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Put yourself in the mind of the user. They will use the software. Maybe
8 h a day. So if the software is boring, breaks or hard to use - your
are ruining 1/3 of the users life!

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Classical understanding (art or code for example) and romantic (art or
UI for example). The understanding of the system for the user is
actually the UI not the code. 

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

Gumption, a old scottish word; what happens with someone who connects
with quality - he is filled with gumption. Drive and enthusiasm. So what
is the Gumption traps then? What draws Gumption from us?

</div>

<div>

**External Gumption traps**

</div>

<div>

-   Getting it wrong - be safe on this by having regression tests for
    examples. 
-   Intermittent failure - this that is wrong becomes right as you start
    fixing it. The only way find these kind of failure is to setup a
    whole lot of profiling. 
-   Parts - third party products in our business. Choose parts from
    people/companies with Gumption. 

<div>

**Internal Gumption traps**

</div>

</div>

<div>

-   Value rigidity - "my programming language is better than yours".
    This is a fast moving business - you can't have value rigidity.
    Expect that you will slow down when you learn new things
-   Ego - similar to the value rigidity. Approach everything with the
    attitude as if your were a complete idiot. One day you'll find that
    you is not an idiot anymore
-   Anxiety - don't dare do anything of fear of failure. Get control
    with a Kanban-board or similar
-   Boredom - flow is the other end of boredom. To get in to flow you
    can use TDD. 
-   Impatience - give yourself more time. Overestimate. Otherwise you'll
    end up taking shortcuts

<div>

Living right - no job is not "just a job". You do your job to feel good
about yourself! 

</div>

</div>

<div>



</div>

<div>

What is quality? How do you know when you delivered quality?

</div>

<div>

Code is not software by itself. It's software when an user actually
starts to use it. Quality cannot be measured until that moment.

The end of the talk was almost a bit emotional... until a phone rang and
Mark had too use some profanity to make it stop. So in the same talk we
got laughs, tears (well ... almost) and profanity. Pretty amazing for a
technical talk :)

</div>

### Mark Rendle on Phone Apps Unlimited 

<div>

And then I went out for awhile. My brain was going slower and slower so
I need some air. It worked wonders and now I'm back for another, very
different, Mark Rendle talk. This time on Phone Applications. Sadly I
have to leave early, but hey I'll get some goodness as long as I'm in
here.

I talked with Mark before the so I know that the talk will be about
moving so much as possible onto a server that your applications can call
via HTTP. That means that you can write simple simple applications
(views if you want) to call into the server.

65% of the internet traffic in the US is from mobile traffic and
climbing. Windows 8 is a not windows anymore, it's mobile platform. With
these quotes Mark got our sense and urgency.

All different platforms (Android, IOS, Windows Phone 7) all have
different tools and languages. So what could we do?

Well in the cloud we have unlimited resources and can chose our platform
and languages. So we try to move as much as possible to the server (in
the cloud).

As such Mark has created a [Pocket
C#](http://pocketgcc.sourceforge.net/pcsharp/) - a small IDE in the
phone. The actual compiling and all the heavy lifting is done on the
server. The writing of code and viewing of the result is done on the
phone. Nice!

For example - use [DropBox](http://www.dropbox.com/) to store files.
It's simple and straightforward to build. Using
[ReactiveOAuth](http://nuget.org/List/Packages/ReactiveOAuth) to do
authentication.

Use [Windows Azure Toolkits for Phones](http://watwp.codeplex.com/) to
reach the [Azure services](http://www.microsoft.com/windowsazure/) such
as SQL Azure or Azure storage for example. And some great great
scalability "for free" :)

I suggest everybody interested in great ways of building phone
applications using your existing skills to find the code from this talk.
Some great stuff in here!

</div>

### Conclusion

<div>

And now I'm off meeting an old friend. 

</div>
