---
layout: post
title: OreDev 2011 - day 1
date: '2011-11-09T19:05:00.000+01:00'
author: Marcus Hammarberg
tags:
  - .NET
  - ÖreDev
  - Agile
modified_time: '2011-11-09T19:05:12.509+01:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-36533086.post-5241683517940752704
blogger_orig_url: http://www.marcusoft.net/2011/11/oredev-2011-day-1.html
---

I was very
fortunate to go to OreDev this year. It's just a great show - I
described it as a "free bar of knowledge alcohol for learn-o-holics".
I thought I'll take a few moments just to jot down some highlights and
stuff I picked up during my first day at
<a href="http://www.oredev.org/" target="_blank">OreDev 2011</a>. This
is mostly for me... but you can read it if you want.

### Jon Skeet on Async in .NET 4.0

<div>

I was late to the conference and missed the keynote, that I learned was
awesome, and also late to this talk. Jon Skeet on the asynchronous
features of .NET 4.0. I picked up some stuff though - most noteable I'll
check out the <a
href="http://msmvps.com/blogs/jon_skeet/archive/tags/Eduasync/default.aspx"
target="_blank">EduAsync</a> blog posts and code that shows of all
interesting features.

</div>

### Aslam Kahn on Functional programming

<div>

From this great session I picked up how Alsam had learned functional
programming and how that changed how he thought about functional
programming; building from simple structures and doing simple
transformations on them, to finally abstract concepts on top of that.

</div>

<div>

Stop think about interactions between objects and start thinking of
values of data and transformations on those data instead. Keep it
immutable and return something from every function.

</div>

<div>

That doesn't come out right here but was great.

</div>

<div>

<a href="http://www.slideshare.net/aslamkhn/not-quite-object-oriented"
target="_blank">His slides is here</a>.

</div>

### Sebastian Lambla on Restful API

<div>

This was a great presentation. Loads of fun and a real practical
introduction to REST. Thought me to:

</div>

<div>

- Send links back to the client so they now WHERE to go next; Link: ;
    rel="next"
- Send back an empty form so the client knows WHAT to send back
- Don't version - but break if data is needed. If not needed use
    optional values
- Send control data in the form so that the client knows HOW to send
    additional requests

<div>

All this will reduce coupling between the client and the server.

</div>

</div>

### Phil Haack on Mobile in ASP.NET 4

<div>

Phil struggled with the technology for the presentation but still showed
some nice features and ways to make you web application be more mobile
friendly.

</div>

<div>

I'll sure check out
<a href="http://jquerymobile.com/" target="_blank">JQueryMobile</a> that
looks awesome

</div>

### Christian Johansen on TDD and JavaScript

<div>

This was another great session on how to do TDD in JavaScript. Amusing
fact was that 100% of the people in the audience did TDD. 0% (!) of us
did it in JavaScript.

</div>

<div>

Christian had some mean skills and the flow of the session was great.
I'll check out JsTestDriver and maybe even check out his book.

</div>

### Felix Geisendörfer on Node.js

<div>

And finally I went to learn some more about
[Node.js](http://nodejs.org/). I think it sound very cool and I was
blown away; this is huge (#2 watched project on GitHub, 230
contributors).

</div>

<div>

And the performance was equally impressive due to that everything in
Node.js is what's called a "Non-blocking call" or asynchronously if you
want.

</div>

<div>

And then my day came to a full circle with async again.  

</div>
