---
layout: post
title: Autonomy in action - school kids
date: 2012-12-04T08:00:00.000Z
author: Marcus Hammarberg
tags:
  - Lean
  - Life of a consultant
  - Agile
modified_time: 2012-12-04T08:00:11.824Z
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-36533086.post-5696287241357235073
blogger_orig_url: <https://www.marcusoft.net/2012/12/autonomy-in-action-school-kids.html>
---

Today I rode the tram to work and was faced with the barbarian horde of
school kids going the other way; to their school. After I had managed
not be run down and falling of the tracks from them running towards the
closing doors of the train, I got an image in my head.

School kids and teacher are excellent examples of command and control vs
autonomy in action.

In this blog post I'll contrast the two models of management and see if
there's any similarities with our normal working conditions.

### Command and control

Imagine the whole school going to a boring outing, probably to a place
the have been to many times before. To learn stuff that they are
not interested in (by now you realize that this is TOTALLY made up -
that would NEVER happen in real school. right :)).

For a school with, say, 500 pupils Organizing that  outing is quite a
feat. The teachers needs to be on their toe and make sure that everyone
is still with us, going to the right place, ending up there. Finally
there they have to make sure that everyone pays attention and don't
wander off. And then going home again...

Quite a feat, as I said. And the teachers will probably be quite tired
after that and also feel that they have been doing a lot chicken-herding
through out the day.

## Autonomy

Now imagine another situation; the school kids going home. That's 500
pupils going from the school, to a ca 450 different places all over
town. For most, that's something that you want to do and you know the
way.

In execution there's a big difference here; no teachers are involved,
every student are expected to know the way (or be picked up by a
parent), they can take any route that they find most suitable.

From the outside that is also quite a feat! And it probably looks like
chaos when the kids pour out of the school on their way to their
individual homes.

What are the teachers doing? Helping some people that needs help, but
for the most part they are not focusing on the process at hand. It will
be taken care of by the autonomous pupils. The teachers trust them to
end up in the right place or ask for help.

### How about us?

How do we manage teams or individuals in our business? And why?

Often there's a lot of micromanagement, command and control taking place
at many organizations (that I've visited). This results in many layers
of management and they have to work a lot to keep the organization or
project together. The more moving parts in the project the more work for
the project management.

In other organizations teams and individuals are trusted to end up in
the right place, fulfil the goal that have been set. This result in a
lot of moving parts that is hard to track and control. But that doesn't
matter since we trust them to do the right thing.

Should they need help they can turn to a "manager" that will guide them
and coach them, but preferable not control what they should do.

Imagine create a command and control project for "taking every school
kid to his individual home"? That would take for ever and wear the
teachers out in no time. Instead we release the imagination and power in
letting them find their own way.

But often, especially in big organizations, we fall back to command and
control. "It's just not safe to let them run around doing whatever they
want" seems to be the thinking.

No. Not if you don't trust them.

### Summary

Nothing new and innovative in here, i'm afraid. Still we fall into the
same trap again and again. I've even seen agile small companies grow up
and become command and control companies. I don't know if you got
anything out of that but I think the picture was pretty striking. I hope
you did too.
