---
layout: post
title: Impact Mapping - great book, great tool
date: 2012-12-03T08:00:00.000Z
author: Marcus Hammarberg
tags:
  - Tools
  - Life of a consultant
  - Agile - ContinuousDelivery
modified_time: 2012-12-03T08:00:02.636Z
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-36533086.post-7066734482832063838
blogger_orig_url: http://www.marcusoft.net/2012/12/impact-mapping-great-book-great-tool.html
---




<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">

<a href="http://impactmapping.org/site/cover500.png"
data-imageanchor="1"
style="clear: right; float: right; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 1em;"><img
src="http://impactmapping.org/site/cover500.png" data-border="0"
width="200" height="200" /></a>

I've just got my copy of the [Impact
Mapping](http://impactmapping.org/book.php). It was long awaited for me
and apparently for others too since it went out of stock in a couple of
weeks. My own copy was 'hijacked' by a client that read it overnight and
started to use Impact Mapping the day after.

In this post I'll write down some thought after reading the book from
cover to cover. I wanted to do this on Amazon but sadly I cannot since
they only accept review from people how bought the book directly from
the. Well - this will have to do instead then.
I'll hint right now that this would be a 5-star review (to add to the 9
other 5-start reviews that's already on Amazon).

### What is it?

Impact mapping is described to great effect at the official site;
[www.impactmapping.org](http://www.impactmapping.org/). So here I'll
present my own journey up to Impact mapping. This is by no means the
journey everyone have done but it helps me to place it in the right
place.

I started my agile journey doing
[TDD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test-driven_development). That was a
great improvement for the quality and stability of my code but pretty
soon I found myself asking; so what happens before this? How do I know
where to begin? Or stop for that matter? Am I even doing the right
thing?

There must be some pieces to the puzzle I'm missing.

This got me looking at [BDD](http://dannorth.net/introducing-bdd/) at
first and later on [Specification by
example](http://specificationbyexample.com/). Now I got the pieces
together better and found a way to communicate and understand business
users. I was introduced to two new heros; [Dan
North](http://dannorth.net/) and [Gojko Adzic](http://gojko.net/).

However after awhile I found myself asking the same question again: what
happens before this? How, on earth, do the business people come up with
the scenarios? What if they don't know what the best thing to start
with? Or just; here's the 342 user stories that we want you to
implement - why did you need scenarios now again?

There must be some more pieces to the puzzle that I was missing...
Again. Why were we doing this now again?

[Impact mapping](http://www.impactmapping.org/) is the next logical
step. This is how to come up with the next important thing is to
implement. I've read and heard about it for quite some time, tried it a
couple of time but never really got the hang of it. Could Gojko's new
book shed light in the dim corners of my knowledge?

### The book

The book is divided in three parts and I think that works effectively to
show different aspects of Impact mapping. The first part is an
introduction (Duh?!) to the subject and places Impact mapping on the map
(sorry couldn't resist myself) with a context and place for it. Gojko
has, of course with the Specification-by-example-background he has,
supplied us with a couple of concrete examples that made sure I
understood Impact maps here.

The next part puzzled me for awhile. It's called "The roles of Impact
mapping" and for me it came out as a lot of different "sales" pitch on
when and where Impact mapping can make an impact (again; sorry. I'll not
do that again). "When would I ever need this?", was my first thought but
then it hit me. Not only was this a great way of introducing the roles
that impact maps can play but also did it give me fuel when i have to
describe and present this to people in different situations. It was
great actually and a lot of quotes and sentences was underlined here.

This part is also littered with reference to further reading which I
really appreciate.

The last part is called "Creating Impact maps" and by now I my whole
body itching for this; practical matters. This is a handbook that helps
you to create impact maps and facilitate workshops to help others. Lots
of examples and concrete do's and don'ts through this part.

### The form

I am, by no means, a designer. But when I got the book I was struck by
the format. It's a magazine shaped, thin little book. A book that you
easily read in a couple of hours. There's a lot of space and pictures
that make each page an easy read. Add to that the it's very focused to
it's subject and we might have a new type of book showing it's face here
(?).

I'm for one would love to read more books like this. Nothing feels heavy
about it.

The illustrations deserve a special mention too: crystal clear and with
a fun, cartoon feel to them. There were a couple of them that I didn't
quite could connect to the text (Hollywood - London - Hollywood) but
that's probably me and my lack of english culture, I presume.

### My thinking

Gojko has for a long time called Impact Mapping a "game changing
technique". I am very much inclined to agree. This is a tool that fits
perfectly to the part of agile that often gets neglected; how to include
the business side of things into the flow of agile.

And it really should be the other way around, right? Business goals
should be the driving force behind us wanting to move IT-stuff faster.
For more on this check out [this great
presentation](http://skillsmatter.com/podcast/home/make-impact-not-software)

To get there I see impact mapping as an essential tool in my tool belt.
I cannot wait to try this out. It one of those things that just feel
*right.*

The only thing that worries me, when I think back on previous projects,
is that the people I have talked to didn't have position or knowledge
enough to be able to create a map like this.

So that's bad then, right?

No - Gojko repeats this throughout the book; You need to have senior
business and technical people in the room. Otherwise you are just
guessing and secondly stand the risk of being overruled later. THAT have
happend to me a couple of times.

Someone asked: but if you don't know the goal (or have the people in the
room that are 'allowed' to decide this) - what should you do?

Answer: Stop! "Without a goal success is random" - Gojko Adzic at Avega
Group 2012-11-28.  

Impact mapping is a business tool. To help the business find and
prioritize between the efforts to achieve their goals. It's not very
hard to grasp but is very powerful. And you all know what comes with
great power, right? Great responsibilities.

Loved the book. If you take agile or lean seriously you should check it
out. It's a great tool that can will you.

5 stars out of 5 possible.
